#Recommendations for Microsoft Streaming Platform

As part of my Data Science bootcamp at the Flatiron School, my partner and I were tasked with developing a recommendation for an imaginary Microsoft streaming platform. This project was my first project for the Flatiron School and served as an introduction to the field of data science. While not novel for the field of data science, it served as an introduction into the field by developing my skills in data analysis, data visualization, and API Calls

We decided to look into television shows as a starting point for Microsoft’s streaming platform. The sector of online streaming has really grown in the past years, and in 2017, Netflix has reported revenues that exceed that of major cable networks. My partner and I decided to start off by research television shows. Television shows were chosen, because of their relatively low cost, subscriber retention rates, and past success with television shows. For these reasons, we decided to look into areas where existing players in the market had succeeded. 

Back in 2013, Netflix’s stock price increased dramatically with the introduction of originally produced television shows such as House of Cards and Orange is the New Black. Due to the success of Netflix in this period of time, our recommendation to Microsoft would be centered around the model of success that Netflix had created. 

Our data science recommendation would focus on the types of television shows that existing streaming services had seen success with. If we were able to analyze which shows resonated most with audiences, we could model a recommendation for Microsoft which would allow them to effectively compete in the field of online streaming. 

The metric by which we measured television show success was through IMDb ratings. Unlike movies, where there is a clear metric for success in box office sales, there is no dollar value assigned to the success of a television show. While Nielsen ratings are commonly used as a measure of a television shows success, this data is not readily accessible to the public and is not tracked for online streaming platforms as it is for cable networks. 

To find a dataset of television shows, we scraped multiple sites using Beautiful Soup to create a dataset of television shows available on Netflix and Hulu. With the dataset, the names were given to the IMDB API to access more information on user ratings. The IMDB API gave detailed accounts of the ratings of particular television shows. In addition to the ratings of the television show, the API also gave demographic data, dividing ratings by gender and age group.

According to our initial research of Nielsen ratings, the age groups which consumed the most television were groups aged 18-34 and 25-34. Of these age groups, 65% of them reported subscribing to an online streaming services when compared to only 42% when looking at older age groups of 55 and older. Another source of information reported that Netflix subscribers tended towards female audiences, making up 57% of the Netflix subscriber base. With Netflix being the main player in the online streaming industry, we decided to capture the demographics to which Netflix most appealed to. The main way of differentiating between television shows was their genre. As a result the results of our data analysis would be finding television genres that most appealed to females of age groups 18-55. 
Our data analysis did not reveal much significant diferances in genre preferences between age groups and small genre preference differences between males and females. The three most popular genres among all age groups were action, drama and mystery. We determined this, because shows of these genres were rated the most highly from IMDB users. There were small but significant differences in the genre preferences between males and females. The three highest rated genres for males were action, comedy, and anime, while the highest rated genres for females were action, drama and mystery. While there were differences in the rankings of these genres, the statistical differences were rather small indicating that ratings between genres were relatively small. From our analysis, we could determine that the distinguishing factors between the ratings of television shows were not their genre classification, but rather the shows themselves. 

Looking back, a flaw in our analysis was the use of user ratings for a metric of a show’s success. While a show may be rated very highly, it does not equate to high viewership. For example, the genre of reality shows consistently displayed the lowest ratings among all genres, however the low ratings numbers do not account for the publicity and buzz that surrounds reality tv shows such as Survivor or the Bachelor. For the most accurate characterization of the factors that lead to a show’s success, other metrics besides user ratings would need to be assessed. 

